The oceans, they are always on the move. Together, the ocean
basins are like a big interconnected highway that
transports nutrients, carbon and heat around the world. This
mesmerizing data visualization of ocean currents was created
using a model called estimating the circulation and climate of
the ocean, or ECCO, for short.
It's built using real world data from satellites, buoys
and all kinds of other measurements.
All of this movement starts with physics.
Because the Earth is spinning, the water feels something called
the Coriolis effect. This pushes some of the strongest currents,
like the Gulf Stream and the East Australian Current, against
the east side of the continents. Because these currents wind up
on the west side of the ocean basins they sit in, scientists
call them western boundary currents. In this visualization,
the currents closer to the surface are white and the deeper
currents are blue, almost like you're seeing those deep
currents through the top layer of water. But what's causing all
this motion and what makes some water rise and some water sink?
Let's take a look. Here, we can see the Pacific Ocean's
strongest current, the Kuroshio. It begins in the warm, tropical
Philippine Sea, and then flows north past Taiwan. After it
reaches Japan, it turns east and heads across the Pacific Ocean,
spinning off huge eddies where it turns right. The Kuroshio
carries over 200 times more water than the world's largest
river, the Amazon. This visualization makes it easy to
see how the ocean moves water across the planet, but what's
hard to see are the places where the water moves up or down. This
is called upwelling, or downwelling. When upwelling
brings cold, deep nutrients into the sunlight near the surface,
it creates a feeding ground for all sorts of ocean life.
Nutrients carried, in part by the Kuroshio Current, help feed
the fisheries in Japan and create an important economic
zone for the country. Another major western boundary current
is the Agulhas Current, which carries water down the east
coast of Africa to its southern tip, called Cape Agulhas. There,
the current makes a sharp turn to the east, but sometimes it
pinches off giant eddies called the Agulhas rings, which drift
west into the Atlantic. These circular currents carry salt and
heat into the Atlantic and form an important part of the
overturning circulation, also called the Global Ocean conveyor
belt. This so called conveyor belt is a system of currents
that carries heat northward, across the equator and into the
North Atlantic. It plays a big role in the climates of North
America, Europe and Africa. Without it, winters in Europe
would be much colder, and droughts in Africa more severe.
But the oceans do more than just move heat around. In some
places, they absorb heat from the sun, and in others, they
release it back to the air. We can see that in the Gulf Stream,
yet another part of the ocean's conveyor belt, the Gulf Stream
starts in the tropics, where the water is very warm, as it drags
warm water up the east coast of North America, it acts like a
heater for the atmosphere. By the time this water has wandered
across the Atlantic and wrapped around Europe, Iceland and
Greenland, it's gotten so cold that it sinks deep into the
North Atlantic Ocean. But temperature isn't the only thing
that can make water sink, so can salt.Salinity or the amount of
salt in the water, can make it heavy. The saltier and colder
water is, the heavier it gets. As it gets warm and fresh water
gets lighter, changes in the heaviness or density of ocean
water are what keep the ocean's conveyor belt turning. Streaks
near the surface show how water is moving from one place to
another. If you look close, you can see below the surface.
Sometimes the water down deep is moving in a different direction,
even the opposite direction. Sometimes this cold, deep water
headed south beneath the Gulf Stream is another part of that
same ocean conveyor belt that keeps Europe warm. Some of that
warm Gulf stream water that heads north at the surface
eventually winds up there, moving south again after losing
so much heat to the atmosphere. Eventually this cold, deep water
will spread around the globe and slowly rise toward the surface.
There it will warm up in the sun and get ready to start the trip
all over again.