Hello everybody, My name is Lucius,
today I am going to talk about how a giant bridge is built over deep water.
In this video I'm using a suspension bridge as an example. First let's talk about how it works.
Suspension bridge's parts consist of towers, anchors, main cables, hangers or suspenders,
and bridge decks. When vehicles drive thru the deck and put up a lot
of weight, the deck is suspended by the hangers, that is why it is called suspension bridge.
The weight then creates tension to the main cables with equal force on both sides. And finally the
weight transfers to the towers. On both sides of the bridge, there are anchors, they hold the main
cables in position. Now you can see the weight load being carried by all parts of the bridge.
Now you probably wonder how this giant bridge is built.
The construction first started with the bridge towers. The underwater part is called a pier.
There are 3 main methods to build underwater piers using pile foundation, cofferdam, and caisson.
Pile foundation constructed by drilling down to the riverbed,
installing rebars, then pouring concrete.
Another method is to use a cofferdam. Cofferdam is built by individual slates,
then water is pumped out, creating a water-free and safe space
for construction workers. When it is done, the cofferdam will be removed.
The next method is using caisson. It is a reinforced concrete box
built off-site and then delivered to the location using a submerged vessel.
Caisson is sunken down to the riverbed, filled with sand inside.          
After the underwater piers are built, the construction of the towers begins.
At this time it is no longer underwater so the construction happens as usual.
After the towers are built, it is time to put on the main cables. The main cables look small
from a far distance, but it is actually very big in diameter if you look closer.
For the reference, you can see here is the size of the Golden Gate Bridge's main cable.
The main cable consists of so many small steel wires in it. they will be squeezed in together
to form the big main cable, and then covered by armor plates to prevent weather damages.
The whole cable is very big and heavy, so it has to be installed on-site
by each little wire. This process is called cable spinning.
On top of the towers, there are saddles, that's where the cables will be laid on.
Workers need to install a travel ropeway and a walking platform. This is a cable carrier,
it carries small wires across the top of the towers thru the entire bridge.      
The cable carrier has to make so many trips back and forth to deliver
small wires until it is enough to form a big main cable. This process could take months.
When the main cable is done, the hangers will be installed.
The final part is the installation of the decks.
Decks are different pieces built offsite, then be lifted up using a crane.
Decks connect to each other and to the hangers. They must be installed starting from the towers
and grow outward on both sides, in this way it makes sure to not throw the towers off balance.
That is pretty much the quick way to explain how a giant suspension bridge
is built. Thank you for watching this video. If you find this interesting,
subscribe to my channel, my name is Lucius. I will see you in the next video.   
