Hello, thanks for joining me 
as we traverse around the country looking at the weather forecast 
for Thursday, tomorrow, and we will have a few things to keep an eye on as well. 
This trough through New South Wales moving 
northwards, pushing some cooler southerly winds through the state there. 
In fact, we'll be seeing cool southerly winds across much of southern Australia 
getting driven up by this approaching high pressure area to the south-west 
that is going to be moving towards the country during Thursday, 
sticking around for several days after that as well, leading 
to some slightly chilly, but generally, quite 
settled weather across the southern half of the country. 
There is these breaks of really fine conditions around most of Queensland 
where flooding is ongoing, but if we track further 
north across North Queensland, the Northern Territory and the Kimberley, 
we will see showers and thunderstorms with the risk of heavy rainfall. 
For Queensland specifically, should be a pretty bright day 
from about Townsville, Bowen, Whitsundays southwards. 
The flood situation across the east is evolving, but in general 
lots of those river levels are starting to come down now 
as it's been a couple of days since that heavy rain ceased. 
Brisbane should have a sunny day, quite a warm one as well. 
High of 34°C. 
We're looking at similar temperatures 
across the south-east and the southern interior. 
Rain, showers and storms expected across the north through the Herbert and Lower Burdekin, 
North Tropical Coast, Cape York Peninsula and the Gulf of Carpentaria. 
This trough is going to be moving northwards through New South Wales 
through the morning, bringing chillier winds. 
So, expect the temperature to drop, actually 
for many places around the middle of the day, 
including in and around Sydney, we could see those temperatures 
fall from the high 20s to the lower 20s for the afternoon. 
That change in wind and that cooler air coming up from the south 
won't generate much shower activity 
but we could see a few light falls, particularly from Newcastle northwards. 
Can't rule out 1 or 2 light falls elsewhere along the coast. 
Fine in the south. 
Fine in the west, with temperatures a few degrees cooler than recent days. 
It's feeling a little cooler across Victoria as well. 
Southwesterly winds are bringing a very autumnal feel to the weather 
on Thursday, with temperatures in the high teens to mid 20s. 
There'll be a little bit of light rain caught up in that wind flow as well on 
and south 
of the Victorian mountain ranges, so we could see a spot 
or two of right around Warrnambool, 
all the way out to South Australia, then and through Melbourne 
and across parts of Gippsland as well 
but none of that rain will be heavy or persistent. 
And that same wind, which is dragging the cooler air 
to Victoria, is doing likewise down here in Tasmania. 
Temperatures in the teens for Thursday, a little bit gusty as well. 
The southwesterlies will pepper the west coast with showers throughout the day. 
Hobart might get 1 or 2 light showers, but there shouldn't be much 
in the rain gauges. 
And for other eastern and northern parts, dry and mostly sunny weather expected 
from Maria Island up through Swansea and St Helens and then around 
the north coast through Launceston, Devonport, Burnie and Wynyard. 
There will be a general 
air of cloudiness across the southern part of South Australia on Thursday. 
That's the case across the south-east, through the peninsulas, the islands, 
the southern ranges, really all of those southern growing regions. 
Fairly cloudy, maybe a spot of light drizzle as well, 
but certainly nothing significant accumulating in your rain gauge. 
Further north, bright sunny skies, with temperatures a little cooler 
than they've been over recent days across the pastoral districts, 
through parts of the Flinders, the, the Riverland and the Murraylands. 
A dry, bright, mostly sunny day expected in Perth with a high of 29°C 
and it's a similar story right along the west coast. 
Showers down in the south, with the possibility of some rain and thunderstorms 
to areas east of Kalgoorlie-Boulder, out towards the Eucla and southern interior. 
Further north, sunny skies expected across the Pilbara 
with a low risk of an afternoon shower or thunderstorm. 
The risk is much higher through these parts 
for some rainfall on Thursday, particularly between Darwin 
and Tennant Creek, where we could see some widespread storm activity building, 
through the course of the day. That could bring some heavy falls, 
and that may lead to renewed rises along our flooded rivers across the Top End. 
So, perhaps some of those rivers will take a few extra days to subside. 
Some wet conditions are also expected around the northern Kimberley, 
but from Broome southwards it should be a bright, clear day 
as it will be around central parts of the country. 
And that's the wrap for now. 
You can always get more weather info on the BOM website or the BOM weather app 
or you can check in with us again for tomorrow's National Weather Forecast.