And now Fox 13 meteorologist Dave Osterberg with your Sky
Dave Osterberg with your Sky tower radar forecast.
tower radar forecast. &gt;&gt; Good Monday morning. 5:15.
&gt;&gt; Good Monday morning. 5:15. Lovely start to the day, but
Lovely start to the day, but grab your jackets. Got a lot of
grab your jackets. Got a lot of 50s out there for you right at
50s out there for you right at 50 degrees for Brooksville. Mid
50 degrees for Brooksville. Mid 50s for Lakeland. Same for the
50s for Lakeland. Same for the Frostproof area. And how about
Frostproof area. And how about a 49 in Wauchula for you? First
a 49 in Wauchula for you? First thing this morning. And it's
thing this morning. And it's not going to last long. We'll
not going to last long. We'll be back up close to 80 degrees
be back up close to 80 degrees again today, but we do have a
again today, but we do have a coolish start to our week now.
coolish start to our week now. High pressure sitting off the
High pressure sitting off the coast of Southwest Florida and
coast of Southwest Florida and with the clockwise flow around,
with the clockwise flow around, it gives us a very light little
it gives us a very light little west wind for today that will
west wind for today that will likely keep those at the beach
likely keep those at the beach right in the upper 70s. And
right in the upper 70s. And then it starts to get warmer as
then it starts to get warmer as you go inland from there. And
you go inland from there. And those east of I 75 today,
those east of I 75 today, you're well into the 80s this
you're well into the 80s this afternoon. So mostly sunny,
afternoon. So mostly sunny, seasonable. There is a cold
seasonable. There is a cold front moving into the deep
front moving into the deep South. Now this is going to
South. Now this is going to come running into the area
come running into the area tomorrow. And then just put its
tomorrow. And then just put its brakes on and hang around for a
brakes on and hang around for a day or two. So you'll notice
day or two. So you'll notice maybe 1 or 2 very isolated
maybe 1 or 2 very isolated showers tomorrow and possibly
showers tomorrow and possibly again on Wednesday as well. As
again on Wednesday as well. As a result of that front, just
a result of that front, just kind of hanging around now,
kind of hanging around now, drought busting rain, and I
drought busting rain, and I knew it was only a matter of
knew it was only a matter of time before the last and worst
time before the last and worst classification of drought was
classification of drought was going to show up in our state.
going to show up in our state. And that is the exceptional
And that is the exceptional drought. And you notice just
drought. And you notice just east of Tallahassee here, part
east of Tallahassee here, part of our state, under the
of our state, under the exceptional drought. And this
exceptional drought. And this will only get worse because
will only get worse because even these 20 to 30% rain
even these 20 to 30% rain chances this week aren't going
chances this week aren't going to really help all that much
to really help all that much today. Beautiful sunshine right
today. Beautiful sunshine right around 79 or 80. And by the way,
around 79 or 80. And by the way, 79 is our normal high
79 is our normal high temperature for this time of
temperature for this time of year. Now we're getting to that
year. Now we're getting to that point now where 80 will be the
point now where 80 will be the norm. Tomorrow front comes into
norm. Tomorrow front comes into the area. Maybe see this 1 or 2
the area. Maybe see this 1 or 2 little pop up showers kind of
little pop up showers kind of later in the day tomorrow, and
later in the day tomorrow, and then maybe 1 or 2 again on
then maybe 1 or 2 again on Wednesday. Not a ton, but we'll
Wednesday. Not a ton, but we'll take anything that we can get.
take anything that we can get. So today sunshine seasonable up
So today sunshine seasonable up right around that 80 degree
right around that 80 degree mark along the coast will be in
mark along the coast will be in the upper 70s, maybe closer to
the upper 70s, maybe closer to the mid 80s as you're well away
the mid 80s as you're well away from the water and inland. Few
from the water and inland. Few clouds. Comfy tonight 63 for a
clouds. Comfy tonight 63 for a low Tuesday. Looks great. Maybe
low Tuesday. Looks great. Maybe 1 or 2 late day showers.
1 or 2 late day showers. Nothing crazy. There's 30% rain.
Nothing crazy. There's 30% rain. Chance for boaters. West winds,
Chance for boaters. West winds, 5 to 10 knots. Seas running a
5 to 10 knots. Seas running a foot or less with a light chop
foot or less with a light chop on the coastal waters. And a
on the coastal waters. And a high tide coming for you. For
high tide coming for you. For you at 716 this morning. Look
you at 716 this morning. Look at this week though 80, 82, 82,
at this week though 80, 82, 82, then a bunch of mid 80s for you