We're mainly feedlot cowboys.
Our primary job is like navigating among different herds
or move them to different locations.
If they're sick, we doctor them.
Meet Bruce Wang, a Texas cowboy that was born and raised in southwest China.
Bruce first arrived in the US 13 years ago as an international student.
He has built a new life for himself here in the deep south.
This is his journey of finding identity as a Chinese immigrant in today's America.
Uh right now we're in Smyre, Texas. I was riding Bill and he's back there chilling
this morning. Most of the time he, he was he was a good boy.
I'm from Yunnan. All right, so we have a lot of minor ethnic groups that do have the tradition of breeding horses.
I was drawn to this culture after I came to Texas. And I began by putting cowboy boots and hat
on myself. But at the same time, I felt something was lacking, right?
Like you dress up like a cowboy and you speak like a cowboy, but you don't do cowboy stuff, right?
It doesn't make you a full cowboy. And that was when I decided to say,
"Hey, maybe I need to go into the cattle industry and become a full cowboy."
They look good. They look good.
I came to the States at the age of 20 as an international student.
Generally there's a huge decline in in terms of Chinese student population.
Maybe I belong to the last wave of Chinese international students who came here by a large number.
The number of Chinese students who came to study in the US last September
dropped by almost a third from its peak in 2017 amid tightened American immigration rules
and worsening US China relations.
Even fewer Chinese students decide to stay after graduation.
Bruce didn't plan to stay at first, until he met his wife Bethany.
What are you laughing about? Do you remember?
I think that was when we kissed. Yeah. Then your sister said, "Gross."
I just I'm still, honestly, I'm still so amazed that you found me from all the way across the world.
I'm still so amazed. Oh, me too.
The couple met during their PhD program at Texas Tech University. They got married two years ago.
Bethany is also learning Chinese. She hopes to visit Bruce's family in China once they have saved enough money.
How do you say I'm Chinese? Zhe Shi Zhong Guo, no, that's China...
Wo Shi, Zhong Guo Ren. Wo Shi, Zhong Guo Ren.
Today, Bruce and Bethany are invited to their friend Tracy's new house.
Thanks for letting us come. Of course.
Tracy first met Bruce 12 years ago when he was working as an international student advisor at Bruce's university.
Amen.
Over the years, he not only guided Bruce through his immigration journey, but also became a close friend.
Have you ever used this gun when we've been hunting? No, I used the other one.
The one with like the pump? Right?
We're going to kind of oil all the pieces and kind of clean it up.
International students are like a very valued members of the American society and that they're our neighbours,
they're our friends, uh just like many of us who were born here.
In the 2024 fiscal year, F1 student visa denial rates surged to a 10-year high.
Even those already in the US could face visa revocation.
Bruce considers himself lucky. He earned his PhD last summer and hopes to stay in Texas.
The southern parts of the United States sometimes is not represented very well around the world.
A lot of folks here, they're hardworking.
They're just like folks in China, right? Who want to support their own families and have a reasonably good life.
China and America right now are in a competitive relationship.
Whatever conflicts are going on between the two countries, and as long as you're willing to listen to their stories,
they're willing to open up their hearts to you.
So, I've been here in America for close to 13 years.
Yeah. So, a good chunk of my life.
I'd love to stay here since I have a family here.
But if I have to go back to China, I won't let go of this cowboy part of me.
It won't go away.